...interview by Dr. L.H. Thomas with W.E. Davis of Regina, September 1st, 1970.
You see, they didn't have to go and live on the farm. They could stay at home.
But if they were over the 7-mile limits, they were already quite well-off.
There's six months of the year. The other six months they would love to...
Some of them went away to work in the bushes during the winter months, you know,
to get some money to help themselves along, or went out to work on farms and so on.
But they, again, they couldn't start working until they were 18.
That's the time they started to improve their homesets.
Then they received by the time, they said that three years to get their titles.
Then they'd be about 21, you see.
Get their titles on the land.
And when we came here, of course, all they were asking was to cultivate 30 acres in that three years.
That's only just 10 acres a year, see, that was all that was required.
And there was no requirement for any buildings of any amount.
But that's changed, of course, a lot since then.
That's the way it was worked up then.
Yes, yes. Would you say that the first years, the first two or three or four years in the settlement
were particularly hard, tough for the migrants?
Well, no, I wouldn't say they were tough.
No more so than for the settlers, generally.
Of course, the climate was, that was the thing that we had to get accustomed to, you see.
Yes.
Because there you don't get any lower than 30 or, although they had frost there,
and there too, you see, in the Argentine, when we were thinking frost there.
I can remember sleet there.
We were there.
Were there any significant number of people who withdrew, who left the settlement
and either went back to the Argentine or went into work in the towns, Winnipeg, shall we say?
Yes, some returned to Wales, and some returned back to Patagonia and all of that,
and others went to various places in Canada.
Yes.
Now, am I right in thinking that very few of the people spoke anything but Spanish and Welsh initially?
Were there just very few English speakers?
There weren't very many.
No.
No, there were very few.
Of course, my mother was very fluent in English.
She'd been teaching in Wales before coming out.
She was very fluent.
Of course, her father, he didn't have any hard-earned education at all, you know,
because he was half-dead before he was six.
And then there was, all he had was a little Welsh, but he had to work when he was very young.
Yes, I know what that means.
I gather that the settlers were anxious to establish schools promptly where the children could learn English quickly.
Is that your...?
Oh, yes.
We were here, we came here in June 1902, and the Royal School Districts, number eight out of seven,
it was open on the 4th of May, 1904, so we were practically almost two years before we had a school.
I can remember that very well.
I often wonder, you know, what the teachers of today would do.
There were about 30 pupils there that morning, and you could count on one hand the number that understood English.
The rest of them had no English at all.
We had no English, but we were bilingual then.
We could speak Spanish, I could speak Spanish.
That's the rule, I think, and I speak English today when I first came out,
but that's gone, I was too young to keep it up, you see.
But we kept up the Welsh.
Well, that's the point I wanted to come at now.
The Welsh was kept up relatively well.
Yes, for a good many years.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, just as it had been in the Argentine.
Oh, yes.
Yes.
But unlike the situation originally in the Argentine,
where the idea had really been to establish a separate Welsh state,
that objective had long since been given up.
Oh, yes.
Yes.
I take it from what you say, Mr. Davies, then, that taking that settlement as a whole,
that you could say that the success of the settlers was comparable to the success of settlers
of other origins in adjacent areas.
Oh, I would say so, yes.
Yes.
What about the situation when the first war broke out?
Were there many who enlisted and went overseas?
A good number, a good number.
Yes, yes, yes.
And some of them are lying in France, and they were born in the Argentine.
Yes.
They found their resting place in the first war.
Yes, yes.
I'm sure this was true of many areas of the prairies where United Kingdom settlers established themselves.
Yes.
The interwar years were, I suppose, similar due to other areas of Saskatchewan in terms of the relative success of farming.
You didn't have, in the 30s, the same drug conditions up there, did you?
No, not in parts, we didn't have that severe, it was dry enough, of course, but it wasn't like some parts,
south more to the southwest here.
Yes.
We didn't have that.
Was the wheat pool an active factor in the community?
Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes.
Yes.
I guess I'm one of the few original ones that, I didn't know that people came there in 1923.
Of course, now I'm out of farming, I'm out of it altogether, but I'm certain there's not very many of them left in the community,
you know, the younger generation.
Yes.
Well, now, that was another question that I was interested in.
The children of the Welsh settlers have remained on the land, at least some of them, I take it,
and have taken over the family farm, or have they tended to move away?
Well, there's some of them still, but very few of them remain there on the farm.
There are some, of course.
Yes.
Some have gone to various occupations in them.
What would your guesstimate be that 40 or 50 people of Welsh background now farming there, or more than that?
No, I don't think there'd be more than that.
I suppose there was an effort in the early years to keep up the musical tradition of the Welsh.
Oh, yes, that was kept up.
We had our singing festivals and we used to draw them from all parties to come there and just listen to the singing.
We had our competitive festivals there for years.
Instead, we'd see that was held there for a good many years.
Oh, yes.
And then the Welsh Church was organized there in 1904.
Now, which denomination was that?
It was the Calvinistic Methodist.
Not the Calvinistic Methodist, but as they are known today, the Presbyterians.
Ah, yes.
There we are.
In 1905, they became affiliated with a denomination in the United States.
And from there, we had help to keep a minister, and we were alone to build our church.
We built the church in 1910.
Before that, we all had our services in the schools.
And there's another congregation that has their services in the school at the Glendul district,
another five miles away, the other part of Welshmeadow.
Yes, indeed.
And did they succeed in getting Welsh clergymen in the early years?
Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Oh, yes.
Did I understand you to say that there was an Anglican church in the community?
Yes, there's an Anglican church. There's a St. David's Anglican church in Bangor.
And then there's the St. David's and St. Athelps in the Fluonan district.
I see.
And that's on the farm that my father bought.
He bought a farm with a church situated there.
Well, now, I'm a little surprised at this because I tend to think of Welsh people as being nonconformist rather than Anglican.
But some of them were Anglican, were they?
Well, very few of them.
But the Anglicans, the Church of the English Seculars, were coming in.
But they did have a Welsh service there for the Anglican church, too.
A man came out there in 1906.
I think it was Levenyver Jones.
And he was there in 1907 or 1908, I think, when he left.
And we didn't have a minister at that time.
And my oldest sister, she was the first marriage that took place in that St. Athelps church, with the servant Jones, Lyra Jones.
He left there and he went to Prince Albert when he was in Denver for many years.
Well, tell me a bit about the centenary celebrations in Patagonia that you attended.
That must have been quite a thrill for you.
Yes, it was quite a thrill, of course, going all that way.
Did you fly down?
Yes, we'd never been in a plane before.
And then the three sisters, my sister, my other sister, she was in the poor town, the state of Washington, USA.
She wanted to go, but the doctor wouldn't.
The minister said there's too long a journey.
And her husband, he was born out there, too, and he had a lot of problems.
So he came with us, with the five of us.
He came here from Fort Thomas to Regina and joined us here and we went.
We had quite a good time there.
And now I see there, of course, there's some there that's still remembered.
There were quite a few of the children we used to go to school with.
Quite a few of them.
Yes, yes.
We were playing a real rally.
We had a banquet and all that.
No admissions, we were just going on the buses, just walked on there.
Just a second and I'll get you a mic.
Yes, well that's a very nice medal, Mr. Davies.
Thanks for doing that.
And you must have enjoyed it.
That picture is 105 years old.
Oh, my.
That's my father.
Well?
That's my grandmother and that's his brother.
There's another one there, he died on the sea.
I see, I see.
I have a picture, or a copy of a picture, of the 1865 settlers and also a picture taken on the ship bringing the group to Canada.
I don't think that all of the people who came to Canada are in the picture, but quite a number are.
And I hope to reproduce these two pictures when I do this little article on the settlement.
There was an interesting article written by Bryn Williams in the British Journal, the Geographical Journal on the Patagonian Welsh back in 1961 with a number of interesting photos in it.
Yes, I was surprised.
I went back and I met some of the, I knew there were children of the old settlers like my father was, you know, like I was.
They were there and they said that he's got quite a few errors in his books.
And I said, well, how is that?
Because I said, I remember the old gentleman, his name was Richard Jones, but he took the name Berwyn after him.
But there was another Jones there, and he was from that range of mountains, the Berwyn Mountains.
He came from close, he took the name Berwyn.
And we used to call him Berwyn, that's all of them.
And I remember him quite well.
And he used to be the recorder there and everything else.
And they said, well, those records were lost in the flood of 1905 after you left.
And then there's nobody afterwards.
And he's got most of this information, you see, from other people.
And some of them had no connection with the first pioneers.
So then they had one book here, it's not here now, my sister had it.
And in that year, I know that one is an error.
He's talking about the group that went up with Colonel Fontana to explore the country in 1885.
And he said they were a group of young, single, romantic young men.
They were married people among them.
My father was amongst them, and he was married and had two children.
Is this the group that founded the settlement up in the foothills of the Andes?
Yes, that's right, yes.
Do you know Richard Welland's novel, Up into the Singing Mountain?
No, I haven't seen that book.
Well, it is a sequel to How Green Was My Valley.
Oh, yes.
And it's a very good novel, and it's set in the Patagonian settlement.
And the combination of it is the movement of this group up into that area,
or at least the main character goes up with some others after the floods of, I guess, 1899.
At the turn of the century.
I remember that flood.
Yes, I'm sure you do.
Yes, I remember it quite well.
I would have lost to that.
Where are the big pictures that you have taken?
Well, get those others that I took. They'd be more interesting.
I have a bit of this.
Just repeat, Mr. Davies, about the group who went down to the anniversary celebrations and the congregational singing.
Well, you see, there's a group of 72 there from Wales.
And the editor of this journal, Elvis of the Rainbow, he was there.
And he's also the secretary of the union of the Welsh people in dispersion, as they're called.
He's the secretary of that too. He was there.
And the other thing, the leader was Dr. J. Alvin Davies, that, progressively, has since passed away.
They were there. But the singing was there, of course, just as good as it had ever been in Wales.
Couldn't be any better.
We had a real good time there.
The Welsh people in that province are quite influential in the government, aren't they, of Patagonia?
Yes, some of them. There was one of them, well, I knew his brother. His brother used to be in school with me.
He was the minister of interior in Hayton Davies.
And, incidentally, his mother was the first child born after they landed there.
And she's born in these caves where they...
See, there's a rock there, they call it a tosca.
And it's very soft. If you've got a good nail, if you can carve your name on it.
And they dug these caves in the rocks, and that's where they spent about...
I think they were there about six weeks before they started the journey into the valley.
Then they took some of the children by boat.
These would take about two days to go by boat, then go up the Chubut River.
And they were met with a storm, and they were lost at sea, and they were away for about two weeks before they landed.
And they'd run out of water and out of provisions, so it was pretty hard on the children, you know?
I'm not sure whether Dad was amongst that group or not.
Whether he did go with them, or whether he walked with the rest of them.
Because I heard him talking quite a bit about them going across these sandy, rocky places, you know?
And about one man would put his stuff in the wheelbarrow, you know, and he'd stand up,
and the whole thing was digging down into the sand.
And he had to leave that and throw the things on his back and carry them there.
He couldn't make any headway at all.
But there was loose gravel. I heard him talking about that, but I don't know for certain, you know, whether he went...
Well, they established very good relations with the Indians, didn't they?
Oh, yes, yes, thank you.
And the Indians taught them how to hunt with the bola and the lasso.
My father was an expert with his lasso and his bolas.
And then there was another one, a short one, about a yard long, two little...
They used to get the rabbits and patties or anything like that.
You see, a patties and then the sweet address, all that.
Just take the head, clean off.
Just drop right on the stone, you see, and it'd be dropped right there.
But the head would be gone clean when you only want to...
And when we first came out here, you see, your father and mother and sister, they went out to a farm.
They were in the Crescent District to buy a cow.
And they got this cow and the calf was out sucking, you see.
And the old farmer says, well, we'll have to drive her into the barn, you see, to get this calf.
And he told my sister, you stay there.
And dad had his rope in his hand.
We had no larry at the work.
We just had an ordinary rope, you see.
And this calf went by my sister all this good work.
And the old man says, why'd you let that calf go?
And the next moment he saw the calf was lying down on the ground there.
He caught it, you see.
I saw the calf and he was lying down pulling and he was lying right down there.
And the hired man on the field had caught it there.
He says, come here, come here.
He says, I want you to see what some of these new immigrants can do, is it?
He was crazy.
And I laughed over that.
Then Mr. McNutt.
Well, I think I'm right in saying that he was the first speaker in the Saskatchewan Institute.
I think he was the first.
I knew him quite well.
I knew the son, too, Russell.
I knew him, too, quite well.
And he had a lot of cattle out, you know, and shares to the lair of 25 head of cattle.
Something like that.
Some of the young boys got them out and brought them out to the district there.
And they got to a certain place where they were to meet.
And that one there, when he got there here, they were trying to get these cows into the barn, you know, to catch them.
And he said, and then we got a rope.
He'd taken some rope with him because he had two coming there.
And they said, you ask, we have some rope here.
I said, all right.
So he started off and he was cutting a piece off every time.
The last two to one, the cow cut a piece off.
And till the end he wanted a short piece before he finished.
But he cut them all for them.
Well, that's very interesting.
He was very... and he could do braiding, you know, just...
He learned that.
He braided anything with the leather, no matter how many strands you had or anything.
Because they did most of their own lair there, you see, their lair there, were leather.
And they braided things, what they never tend to hide.
They just shaved the hair off, you know, and they braided them when they were real wet.
And then after they got finished, they tied onto their saddle and then they put the horse on there to pull for all those words.
And then after that they'd soak it in oil.
They'd iron the ring on the end of it, you see.
I saw one of them breaking too, just before we came here.
The settlers weren't able, of course, to bring much in the way of property with them.
There wasn't much room on the boat for them to bring.
No, there wouldn't be much room.
But what sort of things did they bring?
There was mostly household articles and life with articles.
That?
Well, we have no regrets of it.
Father said he had never no regrets of coming to Canada anyway.
Wow, that's interesting.
See, the reason that he really left there was not so much the flooding, but the instability of the government.
Well, while we were there, I was introduced to the governor of the Chubut province, you see, my relative in land, in Chukwis.
And then two or three days later he was out.
Yes, still goes on.
Still goes on. Yes, still goes on.
Yes, yes.
Well, of course, the Argentine government originally had pursued a more or less hands-off policy,
had let the settlers carry on with their own schools, their own teachers, and really their own South government.
That went on for ten years.
Ten years, that ended ten years.
And then those little, bit by bit they came in, and then of course the schools went out and they had to take the Spanish, the national school.
You had to go there until you were fourteen.
But the Welsh people, they built a school there, that contributed to it before he came out here.
And it was opened, I think, about 1912, a kind of a high school, to teach Welsh and English.
And they had a teacher from Wales there, a Mr Edmunds, and his wife, he was a BSc, you know, and his wife was a BA, and they both taught in that school.
And then there's two or three from the colony went back to Wales, where they then graduated from the University of Aberystwyth,
and then went back and taught in that school, the English and the Welsh.
But of course they got no support from the government for it, and eventually they got that the Welsh people couldn't keep it up.
So that had to be closed.
So a good number of them there today are child English in that colony today.
My cousins there are all, they have got English, the Spanish and the Welsh.
And the Welsh, because of this school, there's quite a number of them like that there.
And they're now, they're teaching the English in the schools there now too, you know.
So that's going to be quite a help.
That's the thing that they're starting to do there now.
Yes.
Well in the 1890s, as I understand it, another source of worry to, I take it particularly the mothers,
of the young men who were getting to be of military age was that the boys would be in the Argentine Army with a lot of rough types.
Oh yes, yes, that was quite...
I look forward to that.
No, no.
Pleasure.
And there was a battle which they used to tell on Sundays, you know, and that was very much a cancer.
And they won out on that, they fought.
They won out on that, that there was no drilling to be honest with you.
Yes, the president promised them.
Yes, they could go with that.
And the Argentine national anthem, as he was in, unison.
And in 1890, Rocca, he was the president then, he said he was going to visit this colony at the time.
And there was an old... there he'd been a bandmaster and he was well known in music and a bard too.
His name was William Jones, but there he was never known as William Jones.
He was called the old band.
Everybody knew him as the old band.
And he had a bardic and a musical named Guiney.
There was this bardic in it.
And he harmonized the national anthem, you see, for the voices, and he trained a choir to sing it by the time Rocca came down.
And when he heard the singing he says, that's going to be it.
And that's the one they were singing there when we were now back in the hundred years,
was the harmonies of this old William Jones band, as they called it.
That's the harmony that was sung there, played and sung there at the hundredth anniversary.
Yes.
He was, I should say, he was really a musician, all right?
A natural musician.
Oh yes, but he'd been an old bandmaster, you know, in Wales and North Wales.
He was from Fristina.
Yes, he was quite a... quite a...
He went under the name of Guiney.
And on this harmonies, you see, it says that the harmony, the air is by so-and-so, and the harmony by Guiney.
Doesn't it? William Jones is by Guiney.
His musical and bardic name, you see.
Yes.
Well, that's very...
No, he was quite a character.